EDGAR SHANNON JR.:
The state police
in the area, because of the
disturbances, in their judgment
said that arrests should be made
if we were to preserve order.
[BOOING]
The crowd-- the
crowd was certainly,
as I say, not so difficult
as in the previous night.
And the state police, I
want to emphasize again,
were in the area because
of the disturbances
the previous night.
They had not been
called in in that sense.
They were here in conjunction
of being available to preserve
life and limb.
I also--
[BOOING AND GROANING]
Now.
The university
officials gave warning.
The state police made arrests.
[BOOING AND GROANING]
All right.
The involved they
pursued onto the grounds,
undertook a degree
that I did not expect,
and that we shall seek
to avoid in the future.
[APPLAUSE]
It was my understanding
that spectators
would be warned that
they should disperse,
and this obviously
was not understood
by many persons not otherwise
involved in the matter.
They had to suffer arrests,
were later released.
One of failing
consequences of arrests
in riot or a near-riot
situation is infringement
on the rights of the entity.
Now, we must support
ourselves at this university
so there never be
need for riot police.
I like to emphasize again--
[BEMOANING]
I'd like to emphasize again that
in the action of these days,
with a number of times
when mobs were assembled,
there had been-- there has
been not a-- there has not been
a single injury--
there has not been any damage
or injury to any person,
and that is the purpose
that I will seek to
and will do everything
possible to maintain.
Now I want to make
it clear that--
[APPLAUSE]
I want to make it clear
that martial law has not
been declared.
[APPLAUSE]
I have no--
I have no feeling that we
are in the kind of straits
where there is an absolutely
situation of conflict
and absolute physical
conflict that
has required that kind of thing
at so many other universities.
Now immediately after this
dispersal on Friday night,
in the circumstances it
was necessary in the view
of the police to maintain
a constant position
around the inside
of the grounds.
Now, as soon as--
as soon as I had an opportunity
to hear with and hear
from students, to
talk with faculty,
I was convinced that the
university was prepared
to continue its
activities, to continue
to assemble as we
done today in a manner
as we had been comporting
ourselves normally
in the daytime
throughout the day.
I immediately requested
the state police
to withdraw from
the central grounds
and from the residential
and academic areas.
[APPLAUSE]
And we proceeded with the--
we proceeded with the long
meeting here yesterday.
We proceeded with activities
of events, of sports,
and of the ball last night.
And I am grateful--
I am grateful to
the kind of spirit
and the kind of attitude
that made this kind of thing
possible.
The problem I think clearly
demonstrates the limitations
of the demand and
confrontation procedure
that we have worked
into during this week.
It has brought us to
the brink of disaster.
Now as the nine demands
that were presented to me
have been according to the
expressions of the-- according
to the procedures of
the new student council,
in the orderly and
proper way when
presented earlier for a
reprimand referendum that
will occur tomorrow.
An expression of student
opinion is most important
on these issues
of the referendum,
and I consider these are very
far-reaching, complex issues
that I have already
been considering talking
about to a number of students.
I want this opportunity
for an individual response
of every student
in the university,
to have his opportunity
to say what he thinks,
and to tell us all
what everyone thinks.
Now some of these
matters in the referendum
and some of the matters in the
so-called demands or matters
that are already under
discussion will continue to be.
Some of them are members
that are not in my hands.
Some of them are members--
or matters that I can deal
with, but all of them are
matters that each one of us and
all of us will have to do so.
Now, I don't want
to take action again
as president that will prejudice
or speak to change color
the opinions of each
individual in this university
as he expresses himself
freely on that referendum.
I want to say, however,
unequivocally, absolutely
that there are
issues here that I do
stand firmly for in the terms
of full access to the university
and to its opportunity and to
full participation of women,
black students, and to--
[APPLAUSE]
I have throughout this year
given personal participation
and actual time,
energy, and money
to these activities,
the energies
I can assure you of the--
and the resources
of the university
will continue to be put
to this to bring it about.
Now there's no more issue that
has been more intellectually
and emotionally
disabling or overpowering
in its total effect on
the lives of our students,
no moral issues or
enterprise that has cruelly
reduced our capacity as a nation
to improve the quality of life
than this war.
[APPLAUSE]
Our involvement has
reached a new intensity
and has widened shockingly
in the past two weeks.
All of our students--
all of you are deeply
and agonizingly
concerned with this war and I
know it and I understand it.
And in this immediate
period of national politics,
for that very reason,
I am recommending
to the faculties
of the university
that they act now to
accommodate students
by not reducing the
requirement of their courses
and their degrees.
We do not change the integrity
of those and the value
to you that you will
require, but to do so by--
but to accommodate students
by permitting delays
in the fulfillment
of such requirements
in order for those of you who
do so desire to concentrate
on constructive action in the
redirection of the nation's war
policy.
[CHEERS AND APPLAUSE]
Second, we must remember
that there is a future.
For those students who feel
that the actions they have taken
in communicating their
views to the government
have had the maximum effect
for which they have hope
or that there are other ways
in which they can continue
to do so, the
university must continue
to teach and to discover
and to remain open for those
that take advantage of.
[APPLAUSE]
We must continue to educate
and train for the future
while we meet a
present emergency.
We must remain open
to do so, and to do
so without the necessity
of outside protection
by our own efforts.
Now I understand,
as I have said,
you're anguished over
the military involvement
in Southeast Asia.
I want prompt action
to the end of that war.
[CHEERS AND APPLAUSE]
I feel further more
that it is urgent
that the national administration
demonstrate renewed
determination to end the war
and the unprecedented alienation
of American youth
caused by that conflict.
[CHEERS AND APPLAUSE]
Now I have conveyed this
alienation in the letters
that I wrote to the senators,
and I said last Wednesday--
as I said last Wednesday,
I feel strongly
that students'
views must be heard
by those who are in a position
to influence and shape
national policy if we are
to change that policy.
To see that our students
could be heard, as you know,
I arranged for the delegation
to go tomorrow to see--
to Washington to see
Senators Byrd and Spong.
I shall-- I shall also
convey to the governor, who
will be meeting with
the president tomorrow,
my expressions of your views.
James Roebuck, president
of the student council
of the university, will
lead the delegation
to see Senators Spong
and Byrd tomorrow.
I have written a message I
would like for Mr. Roebuck
to deliver to Senators
Byrd and Spong.
The message reads as follows.
We, the undersigned
students and faculty members
of the University of
Virginia, are gravely
concerned by many evidences
of anti-intellectualism
and growing militarism in
the national government
of the United States.
[CHEERS AND APPLAUSE]
Education has been
increasingly neglected.
Verbal attacks upon
universities, students,
and the free press by
persons in the highest
levels of government
have become commonplace.
[APPLAUSE]
The unspeakable
tragedy of Kent State
was received in
terms that appeared
challenging and callous.
[APPLAUSE]
The promised disengagement
in Southeast Asia
has been agonizingly slow.
[CHEERS AND APPLAUSE]
The recent announcement of
the invasion of Cambodia,
a critical decision vitally
affecting the lives and futures
of all young men, was used to
reflect personal and political
credit upon the president.
[CHEERS AND APPLAUSE]
It has now become clear that
the decision was reached
without the advice and consent
of either the Secretary
of State or any committee of
the Senate of the United States.
[APPLAUSE]
We therefore urge you to join
with your fellow senators
in reasserting the
authority of the Senate
over the foreign policy
of the United States
and the use of the armed
forces in its support.
[APPLAUSE]
I have already signed
a copy of this message.
[APPLAUSE]
And I hope that every concerned
University of Virginia
student will join with me
and sign this message for Mr.
Roebuck to deliver it to
our distinguished senators
in Washington tomorrow.
Copies of this petition are
available in Pavilion 8.
I hope you'll help me during
the next few hours and days.
Actually, it's got to be
done before early tomorrow
to get every possible
signature on that statement.
[APPLAUSE]
I also in conclusion
urge you to continue
to help us all to work together
to maintain the university.
[APPLAUSE]